# Rust is SLOW actually? - AOC 2023 day 1 performance comparison

I just got through with the [Advent of Code 2023 Day 1 challenge](https://adventofcode.com/2023/day/1), and [I wrote about my trials and tribulations](https://dev.to/jwrunge/calibrating-an-elven-trebuchet-in-rust-advent-of-code-2023-day-1-15kj) in great, long-winded detail. I'm a frontend guy who's used to working in TypeScript, a near-total Rust newb, so I thought it might be interesting to do a little comparison write-up. I ran through the challenge in Rust, then circled back and ported it to JavaScript (running in Node.js). After the lengthy account in my initial post, I figured the comparison would be short and sweet, just some general impressions about what I like about each language, with a fun little benchmark at the end that showed just how much faster Rust was.

Then I ran the benchmarks, and what I saw was shocking enough that I figured I'd better yank the benchmarks out of my comparison article and make a dedicated post in an attempt to get some answers.

Full disclosure: I'm not a benchmarker. When my apps run slow, I do performance testing, but beyond that, I'm usually happy just knowing something is "fast" or "slow." And in my mind, Rust is fast and JavaScript is slow.

But that's not what I'm seeing in these numbers, and I think I need a sanity check.

## My test

To test execution speed, I used PowerShell's `measure-command` (I use Windows, btw -- why are you laughing?). `measure-command` is a rough equivalent to the `time` command in Unix.

I compiled the Rust code using `cargo build --release`, then ran each implementation 5 times and took the average execution speed.

## The initial results

Running each, we end up with: JavaScript, avg 39.9254ms; Rust: 18.3171ms. Rust is faster by ~54%.

That makes sense. I don't doubt this result at all.

## Let's see if that scales

I then ran each implementation on on a loop (internal to the code, not via the command line) 1000 times and see how it handles prolonged activity. That's an `fs::read_to_string()` (Rust) or an `fs.readFileSync()` (JS) followed by processing 1000 strings, 1000 times.

This is where the results get a little sus. JavaScript: 3260.6001ms; Rust: 6564.07532ms. Oof... Rust is more than twice as *slow*. That doesn't feel right...

I thought perhaps that Rust's file reader implementation just wasn't up to snuff, assuming Node's `readFileSync` implements some battle-tested C or C++ function, but no... removing file reads seemed to have little affect on either implementation.

I'm not exactly dissatisfied with Rust's performance: it actually scaled pretty well, as far as I undrstand it. With 1000x the work, Both programs scaled well; with 1000x the work, the Rust code was only ~358x slower. The prolonged activity didn't scale linearly, instead finishing significantly faster that one would expect. This, to me, suggests one of two things:

* There is a hefty invocation cost (this doesn't seem likely - running the program once only cost ~18ms)
* There is a "warm-up" period, with the code executing faster over time

I suppose a third option could be that invocation is slow (say, 17ms); the code executes initially very fast (1ms), and then *slows down* over the duration of the program's runtime. That seems less likely to me.

## Is Node just really fast?

In any case, the JavaScript code was only ~82x slower at 1000x the load. So another possible explanation would be that the Node is doing some kind of magic like cacheing the file read or certain execution patterns... In which case, highly repetetive tasks could be a rare performance boon for scripting languages like JS.

It's also possible (likely) that, as a Rust newb, there is some kind of inefficiency in my code that is exacerbated by prolonged run time / repetition. That code, in addition to being mostly included in my previous article, can be found [on GitHub](https://github.com/jwrunge/advent_of_code_2023).

It's also possible that I'm a JavaScript prodigy and have the unique ability to make it run faster than compiled code. /s

So I'm curious, Rustaceans and Node... Node-heads? What could be the cause of this discrepancy between a single execution and execution over time?
